
=head1 NAME

Mason::Manual::Setup - Setting up Mason

=head1 SETUP

=head2 Web development

The most common use of Mason is to generate dynamic web content.

L<Poet> is a web framework designed specifically to work with Mason. Given an
HTTP request, Poet generates a corresponding Mason request, and uses the output
from Mason to form the HTTP response. Poet takes care of the web development
details that are outside of Mason's domain, such as server integration and
configuration. L<Poet::Manual::Tutorial|Poet::Manual::Tutorial> shows how to
set up a Poet/Mason site in great detail.

Mason can also be used in the popular web frameworks L<Catalyst|Catalyst> and
L<Dancer|Dancer>, as a drop-in replacement for their default template engines.
See L<Catalyst::View::Mason2|Catalyst::View::Mason2> and
L<Dancer::Template::Mason2|Dancer::Template::Mason2>.

=head2 Non-web development

Mason can be used to generate any kind of dynamic content. I have personally
used it to generate Apache configuration files, emails, and C++ code.

To use Mason from a script or library, use the L<Mason::Interp> API:

    my $interp = Mason->new(
        comp_root => '/path/to/comps',
        data_dir  => '/path/to/data',
        ...
    );
    my $output = $interp->run( '/request/path', foo => 5 )->output();

If you want to process a directory with a mix of Mason templates and static
files, check out L<Any::Template::ProcessDir|Any::Template::ProcessDir>.

To try out Mason syntax from the command line, use the L<mason> script:

    % mason
    2 + 2 = <% 2+2 %>
    ^D
    2 + 2 = 4

=head1 LOGGING

Mason uses L<Log::Any|Log::Any> to log various events, such as the start and
end of each request. You can direct thesse logs to the output of your choice;
see L<Log::Any::Adapter|Log::Any::Adapter>. If you don't specify anything then
the logs will go into the void.

=cut
